Welcome back, today we begin our
module on analytical technologies.
In this module,
we'll focus on the applications and
tools that are used to store,
extract and analyze data.
In our first module, we learnt how events
and characteristics in the real world,
are captured by source systems.
In this video, we'll definitely
pick up where we left off, and
talk about the various ways
in which data can be stored.
Given that we're potentially capturing
massive amounts of data in our
source systems.
It's natural to ask where
the heck does all the stuff go?
Well, it turns out that each source
usually has it's own storage system to
hold data relevant to that system.
Unfortunately, that isn't necessarily
ideal for us as analyst for a few reasons.
First, it's likely that the source's
storage system is optimized for
functional performance, not for
data extraction and analysis.
As an example, you may have seen the terms
online transactional processing or OLTP.
An Online Analytical Processing OLAP or
OLAP.
These terms refer to storage systems that
are optimized for business operations and
transactions versus those that
are optimized for analytics.
While it's possible to perform
analytics on transactional systems,
it's often much easier to do
it on analytical systems.
The second challenge with source
store storage systems is that they
often contain a lot more information
than we really need for analytics.
It's not uncommon for a source database to
contain all sorts of internal working data
that really doesn't have a use
outside the system operation.
We prefer not to have to carry all that
extra data indoor analytical environment.
We also need to remember the source
system can be critical to the day to
day operation of the business.
We may not want to risk slowing down or
even crashing those systems by allowing
direct access to system data
by analytical applications.
Finally, because source systems often
deal with very high volumes of data,
they may not store data for
very long in order to optimize
the overall performance of that system.
This means that if we want the data, or
some subset of the data, to be
available for a longer period of time,
we need to grab it and
put it in a longer term storage location.
As we mentioned earlier, we do sometimes
connect to record resource systems
especially when we access
to real time data.
We may even intercept data as it
streams through a connection point.
However, a more common
solution is to gather data
into a separate storage location.
This may be a central data repository,
where data is physically colocated.
It could also be a virtual repository,
where the data is physically located in
different places but appears to the user
as though it's in a common location.
And it could be a combination of these two
things or a semi-centralized repository.
So we've talked a bit about
where we store information.
Let's change gears a little and
talk about how we store information.
There are many ways to store data, but
here we'll cover the two broad mechanisms
that you're most likely to see in
the world of analytics, data files and
databases.
We'll cover a number of common
data types in a few minutes but
it's useful the first
talk about file systems.
A file system is basically
just the digital equivalent of
an organized file cabinet.
I take pieces of information,
I put them into a folder and
perhaps put that folder
into a larger folder.
Think about your own computer,
this is how you probably store
most things on your PC or Mac.
The nice thing about a file system
is that I can put pretty much
anything I want there and just note it's
name and location so I can find it later.
File systems are attractive in that they
can handle all sorts of information,
including what we call unstructured data.
We can store documents, spreadsheets,
pictures, music, video, you name it.
The file system doesn't really
care what's in the file.
The downside of storing data in
file systems is that it's not
as obvious how it accessed the data,
given that you are sending in
a bunch of different file locations.
It's also unclear how I perform data
analysis on something like a document,
photo or a video without some sort of
intermediate processing to turn it into
something more structural.
One important example of a file system
is the Hadoop Distributed File System or
HDFS, which is a big data manifestation
of the file system concept.
HDFS uses massively parallel
processing on relatively inexpensive
infrastructure to efficiently store very
large amounts of information without
much regard to the data type.
We'll talk a bit more about big
data technologies in a later video.
So, what about the data files themselves?
There are many types of data files.
Think of all the different extensions
that files on your computer have but
there are few file types that come up most
often in the world of data analytics.
The first is what's called
a delimited text file.
Normally, a delimited text file
contains data that represents
a two dimensional table with columns and
rows.
That data itself is stored as text
with breaks between the columns and
rows, identified using specific characters
or formatting codes called delimiters.
The most common delimiters are commas,
tabs and pipes.
The pipe is the vertical line
character you see on your keyboard.
You'll often see comma delimited files
with the extension CSV which stands for
comma separated values.
Tab and pipe delimited files usually
just have the TXT text file extension.
The nice thing about text files is that
they are understood by wide variety of
systems and analytical tools.
So it's pretty straight forward to
move data from one environment to
another using this file format.
A second file type is
an Extensible Markup Language or XML file.
XML is a flexible structure of encoding
documents and data that was developed in
the late 90s, primarily to facilitate
data sharing over the Internet.
However, it has a wide range of
applications from web pages to
applications to messaging systems.
The nice thing about XML is that it is
a common standard and it allows for
a more complex structuring of data that
something like I'm doing the text file.
The downside is that it requires
a more sophisticated interface
to interpret the data and
structure for analysis.
A third type of file is a log file.
Log files are generally used to
capture event data from a system and
are common in machine data, messaging and
web analytics applications.
Log files may or
may not follow a standard structure and
they generally require something called
a parser to read and interpret the file.
The advantage of log files is
that they are very flexible,
it can capture just about
any data structure you want.
However, this comes at the expense of
a much more complicated process for
reading and using the data.
In fact, there are specific software tools
that specialize in parsing log files.
The last type of data file we'll
discuss is really a class of
files that are specific to
common data analysis tools.
Most tools have their own proprietary
file formats for storing data,
along with other information
called metadata.
Which describes calculations, operations,
or other attributes of the data itself.
Far and away, the most common of these
is the Microsoft Excel spreadsheet file.
Even though there are a lot of
sophisticated analysis tools out there,
the reality is that
a disproportionate amount of actual
analytical work is done in Excel.
And that's not necessarily a bad thing,
just about everyone knows how
to do basic operations in Excel.
And there are certain things that are
quite frankly just easier to do in Excel,
making it a very flexible tool for
both manipulating and sharing data and
analytical results.
However, Excel is just one of
many specialized file formats.
Tools like SaaS, SPSS, Tableau, and
a whole host of other applications
each have their own specific formats for
storing data in standalone files.
Broadly, this means you may need to use
that specific application to open and
use those files.
But increasingly,
applications are opening up a bit and
building in the ability to ingest and
interpret other file types.
It really depends on the tool.
Okay, so we talked about data files.
Now let's move on to databases.
A database is simply
an organize collection of data.
When we say database, we're usually
referring to both the structure and
design of a data environment,
as well as the data itself.
A database seeks to store
data in a more complex way
than what could be
achieved in a data file.
Specifically, a database usually stores
a number of different date entities
with some unifying information about how
those entities are arranged or related.
This enables access to a wider array of
information in one common environment.
Versus storing that information in
multiple data files that may or
may not be tied together.
Usually, a database is constructed using
a Database Management System or DBMS.
A Database Management System is
a software application use for
creating, maintaining and
accessing databases.
There are variety of different
types of databases but far and
away the most common is
the Relational Database.
In fact, the relational database is so
important that we'll spend a later video
in this module talking in detail
about this type of database.
And we'll spend all of module
three learning how to extract data
from relational databases.
The basic concept behind relational
databases, is that we store information in
two dimensional tables, and then to find
specific relationships among those tables.
It turns out that this can be a really
efficient and effective way of storing
data that is pretty easy to understand
which contributes to it's popularity.
The idea was developed by a computer
scientist named EF Codd at IBM in 1969 and
1970.
Given that it's been nearly 50 years
since then, it's pretty impressive that
the relational database remains
the dominant paradigm in data storage.
That having been said, the relational
database is not the only type of database.
In fact, there are a number of
emerging types of databases that
are being used to handle special types
of data, store unstructured data, or
improve performance in
the era of big data.
Let's talk about four common
Alternative Databases.
Graph Databases, Document Stores,
Columnar Databases, and Key-Value Stores.
A graph database is based on graph theory,
or
the study of para-wise
relationships between objects.
These databases tend to work well
with highly interconnected data,
like relationships between people or
locations and
have applications in physical and
social network analysis.
A document store, as its name suggests,
is generally designed to store documents,
along with key pieces of metadata
describing those documents.
It's useful for storing unstructured data
or different data types in a way that's
a little more useful than
a typical file system.
Columnar databases are storage mechanisms
which seek to improve the performance of
data access.
By focusing on columns of data tables,
versus the row based approach
of relational database systems.
It turns that when we write
information into a database,
we usually do it row by row.
Which makes sense when each row of data
represents something like a purchase
transaction or a new customer.
However, when we extract data
from databases we're usually more
interested in summarizing some
attribute across all rows.
Columnar databases tend to
be much more efficient at
this type of data extraction operation.
Key-value stores are very simple but
power ways of storing data.
They store information
in very small pairs.
Typically, a key and a value.
This method of storing
data is very flexible
as it doesn't require the extensive design
and structure of other data base types.
Without getting into too much detail,
it turns out that storing data
in this way is very efficient.
Uses less memory, and
can be used to achieve very high levels
of speed in certain types of operation.
However, it also requires
more sophisticated
programming to manipulate and
extract data.
So let's recap.
We've learnt about two broad types of
data storage, Data Files and Databases.
We talked about file systems and specific
file formats like Delimited Text Files,
XML Files, Log Files and
Application-specific Files.
We introduce the idea of databases and
covered different types of databases like
Relational Databases, Graph Databases,
Document Stores, Columnar Databases and
Key-value Stores.
As a data analyst, you almost certainly
encounter a number of these data storage
mechanism both data files and databases.
And you need to understand
how to work with them.
Unfortunately, we can't cover
all of them in this course.
But as we mentioned earlier, we will go
a bit deeper into relational databases.
And in subsequent courses,
we'll use Excel and
more advanced tools to actually
execute different types of analysis.